Define experiment using a record. (#2999)
modelica/ModelicaSpecification: chapters/annotations.tex

\end{center}

\begin{annotationdefinition}[experiment]
\begin{synopsis}[grammar]\begin{lstlisting}
annotation "experiment" "(" experimentModifiers ")"
\end{lstlisting}\end{synopsis}
\begin{semantics}
The modifiers are for the the following record.
\begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica]

> record Experiment

Reviewer: Wrong case:
```suggestion
record experiment
```

  Real StartTime(unit = "s") = 0;
  Real StopTime(unit = "s");
  Real Interval(unit = "s") = $\ldots{}$;
  Real Tolerance = $\ldots{}$;

> end Experiment;

Reviewer: Wrong case:
```suggestion
end experiment;
```

\end{lstlisting}

> The \lstinline!experiment! annotation defines the default start time (\lstinline!StartTime!) in {[}s{]}, the default stop time (\lstinline!StopTime!) in {[}s{]}, the suitable time resolution for the result grid (\lstinline!Interval!) in {[}s{]}, and the default relative integration tolerance (\lstinline!Tolerance!) for simulation experiments to be carried out with the model or block at hand.

Reviewer: I see your point.  I think there is a perfect analogy here with a parameter in a model:
```
model M
  parameter Real startTime(unit = "s") = 0.0;
end M;
```
Here, we don't say that `0.0` is the default value for the parameter; that a parameter can be changed after translation is well understood.  The same should be true for `experiment.StartTime` etc.

> The \lstinline!experiment! annotation defines the default start time (\lstinline!StartTime!) in {[}s{]}, the default stop time (\lstinline!StopTime!) in {[}s{]}, the suitable time resolution for the result grid (\lstinline!Interval!) in {[}s{]}, and the default relative integration tolerance (\lstinline!Tolerance!) for simulation experiments to be carried out with the model or block at hand.

Author: Ok, removing 'default' and instead adding that tools can allow users to override them.

> The \lstinline!experiment! annotation defines the default start time (\lstinline!StartTime!) in {[}s{]}, the default stop time (\lstinline!StopTime!) in {[}s{]}, the suitable time resolution for the result grid (\lstinline!Interval!) in {[}s{]}, and the default relative integration tolerance (\lstinline!Tolerance!) for simulation experiments to be carried out with the model or block at hand.

Reviewer: As the _default_ is now removed, I suggest to resolve this and continue the discussion if needed at the new sentence about overriding.

If \lstinline!StartTime! is not specified it is assumed to be \lstinline!0.0!.

> The  \lstinline!StopTime! has no default and must thus be specified.

Reviewer: I'm adding my own variant of @maltelenz's and @eshmoylova's remarks here.

Note that not providing a default value in the pseudo-code record definition is not the same as making the field required — just so that we're not afraid of leaving `StopTime` without a default in the pseudo-code definition above.  Instead, one has to explain in the text what leaving such a field undefined means.  This is what is done here, but it seems that we don't agree regarding the current formulation.

My suggestion would be to couple this to the definition of _simulation model_, with a cross reference to a proper definition in https://specification.modelica.org/master/introduction1.html#some-definitions.
```suggestion
The  \lstinline!StopTime! is required for a simulation model, see \cref{def:simulation-model}.
```

Note that the definition with `\label{def:simulation-model}` would also need to be added, but for this we need to merge #3121 first.  (Also note connection with #3146.)

Author: It should be the other way round, and I want to avoid depending on other PRs.

Reviewer: It seems to me that finishing #3146 shouldn't take that long, so it might be worth keeping this conversation open just a little longer…

Author: Stating that a simulation model must have a StopTime doesn't seem necessary; the logic should be that StopTime (in a non-partial model) requires that it is a simulation model - not the other way round.

That means that
```
model A
  Real x;
equation
  der(x)=1-x;
end A;
```
remains a valid model that can be simulated, and all non-partial models with StopTime in MSL should be simulation models and it should thus be possible to simulate them.

\end{center}

\begin{annotationdefinition}[experiment]

\begin{synopsis}

> The \fmtannotationindex{experiment} annotation has the following contents:

Reviewer: Synopsis is not supposed to contain natural language explanations.
```suggestion
```

\begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica]
record experiment
  Real StartTime(unit = "s") = 0;
  Real StopTime(unit = "s");
  Real Interval(unit = "s");

>   Real Tolerance;

Reviewer: Might as well spell out the unit of `Tolerance` (would allow rejecting bad units in case we would allow parameter expressions in the future):
```suggestion
  Real Tolerance(unit = "1");
```

\end{center}

\begin{annotationdefinition}[experiment]

> \begin{synopsis}[grammar]\begin{lstlisting}

Reviewer: Why not go all in for the record style of presentation, simply skipping the grammar?  GitHub doesn't allow me to make a complete suggestion, but the idea is to simply language in the `synopsis`, and replace the piece of grammar by the definition of the record.
```suggestion
\begin{synopsis}\begin{lstlisting}
```

Author: This change has been applied

annotation "experiment" "(" experimentModifiers ")"
\end{lstlisting}\end{synopsis}
\begin{semantics}

> The modifiers are for the following record.

Reviewer: This line can be skipped when using record style of presentation:
```suggestion
```

Author: Removed

> \begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica]
> record experiment
>   Real StartTime(unit = "s") = 0;
>   Real StopTime(unit = "s");
>   Real Interval(unit = "s");
>   Real Tolerance;
> end experiment;
> \end{lstlisting}

Reviewer: To go with suggestion to have this in synopsis instead:
```suggestion
```

Author: This should now be done.

> end experiment;

Reviewer: Let's try not to introduce a new way of mixing grammar style presentation with pseudo-code records.  Just using the record style of presentation would be better, combined with clarifications in the text below as needed.

> The \lstinline!experiment! annotation defines the start time (\lstinline!StartTime!) in {[}s{]}, the stop time (\lstinline!StopTime!) in {[}s{]}, the suitable time resolution for the result grid (\lstinline!Interval!) in {[}s{]}, and the relative integration tolerance (\lstinline!Tolerance!) for simulation experiments to be carried out with the model or block at hand.

Reviewer: Two reasons to not say _the model or block at hand_:
- We should generally make use of the term _simulation model_ instead.
- In this particular case we should leave the door open for inheritance, meaning that the `experiment` may reside in a non-simulation model.
```suggestion
The \lstinline!experiment! annotation defines the start time (\lstinline!StartTime!) in {[}s{]}, the stop time (\lstinline!StopTime!) in {[}s{]}, the suitable time resolution for the result grid (\lstinline!Interval!) in {[}s{]}, and the relative integration tolerance (\lstinline!Tolerance!) for simulation experiments.
```

Reviewer: I hope this does not count the same as being specified on the model containing the single component, but I can imagine that looking at the `experiment` annotations of the components in a model could be a useful way to heuristically obtain settings that a tool can suggest that the user set in case no `experiment` annotation is found. Anyway, if we'd like to discuss this further, I think it belongs more to #2314 than the present PR.

Reviewer: I'm of the opinion that as long as #2535 is being discussed, we shouldn't make clear statements that either speak in favor or against inheritance.

Author: But *the marked text wasn't changed in this PR*.
I can understand changing it - but that should be in a separate PR - like #2535; not in this one.

Blocking PRs by requesting unrelated changes isn't helpful.

> Tools should use appropriate defaults for \lstinline!Interval! and \lstinline!Tolerance! instead of the $\ldots{}$.

Reviewer: The way we've used record definitions for other annotations, we don't write out an ellipsis:
```suggestion
When \lstinline!Interval! or \lstinline!Tolerance! is not provided, the tool is responsible for applying appropriate defaults.
```

Also remove the `= $\ldots{}$` in the record definition.

> If \lstinline!StartTime! is not specified it is assumed to be \lstinline!0.0!.

Reviewer: Wherever we specify defaults in the annotation records, the same information should not be repeated in the text:
```suggestion
```

> If \lstinline!StopTime! is set the model is required to be a simulation model.

Reviewer: We need to consider the options here, probably bringing them up for an informed discussion at a phone meeting.

I would like this to be a valid non-simulation model:
```
partial model MicroSecondExampleBase "Base class for examples on the micro second time scale"
  annotation(StopTime = 10e-6);
end MicroSecondExampleBase;
```

Some candidate designs to be included in a poll:
- `StopTIme` implies _simulation model_ (can lead to the kind of error shown in `MicroSecondExampleBase`)
- _Simulation model_ implies `StopTime` (making `StopTime` part of the _simulation time_ definition definition)

Author: As indicated that it is a different issue and shouldn't block this one.

The problem, as previously, indicated is that realistically you often have cases like this (but with more components) - in particular I see this used more often than the MicroSecondExampleBase:
```
model TestBed
   replaceable Modelica.Blocks.Interfaces.SignalSource source;
   Plant plant;
equation
   connect(source.y, plant.u);
   annotation(experiment(StopTime=1e2));
end TestBed;
```
Clearly:
* StopTime is relevant for some such cases - but not all - since the StopTime might vary a bit depending on the source.
* The model isn't a simulation model itself, so the StopTime cannot be applied here.
* Note that for some templates it doesn't make sense to include the 
* We thus need to both have a way of marking actual simulation models in libraries, and way to indicate simulation settings that can be inherited.

Reviewer: > As indicated that it is a different issue and shouldn't block this one.

I find it difficult to see how we can wrap up this PR without agreeing on some relation between presence of `StopTime` and _simulation model_.  Otherwise, we need to find a way to incorporate some of the changes without getting into the details of this (that is, saying things like "… is required to be a simulation model"). However, the question about `StopTime` might very well be the most important aspect of this PR, so I think it's worthwhile trying to find a solution.

I agree that we don't want the `TestBed` above to be a problem.  It clearly cannot be a simulation model, so we would be shooting ourselves in the foot if we say that `StopTime` implies being a simulation model.  The solution seems easy though, and comes down to relying on a working definition of _simulation model_.

We already have this:
> Such a class is allowed to be incomplete, and cannot be instantiated in a simulation model; useful, e.g., as a base class.

Our definition of simulation model could be made consistent with this rule, so that it is fulfilled by definition.  We could define _simulation model_ as a class meeting all of these requirements:
- model or block
- not partial
- no components of partial type
- has `StopTime`

It would also make sense to narrow down where the `experiment` annotation is defined:
> A model or block may have an \lstinline!experiment! annotation, defining the start time…

According to such a definition neither `TestBed` nor `MicroSecondExampleBase` would be an error, and we have the nice property that every simulation model has a `StopTime`.

By the way, this looks incomplete:
> Note that for some templates it doesn't make sense to include the

Reviewer 2: > Our definition of simulation model could be made consistent with this rule, so that it is fulfilled by definition. We could define _simulation model_ as a class meeting all of these requirements:
> 
>  * model or block
>  * not partial
>  * no components of partial type
>  * has `StopTime`

In OpenModelica we use the `experiment` annotations to automatically test libraries, so for us it's very much preferable to be able to determine whether a model can be simulated or not "at a glance". Defining a simulation model as a model that among other things has no components of partial type would make that a lot more complicated since that would involve having to look up each components type.

So if we want non-simulation models to be allowed to have `experiment` annotations I think it would be better to have that as part of the annotation, like `experiment(Template = true)` or something. Or possibly by allowing partial models to have `experiment` annnotations, but I'm not sure if that covers all use cases.

Author: To me it also a matter of intent. If a model has components of a partial type, was it because someone forgot to redeclare it or is it because it was intended as a template. 
A human can see that if it is in "Examples"-package it is likely a missed redeclare, but in "Templates"-package it is likely intended as a template.

Reviewer: > Defining a simulation model as a model that among other things has no components of partial type would make that a lot more complicated since that would involve having to look up each components type.

This is a good point, exactly the kind of thing we need to consider when working out a good definition of _simulation model_.  I agree that it would be great if _simulation model_ could be determined on a glance, but I guess it would be a routine operation for a Modelica tool to verify the condition.

I hope that we can do this without introducing a new annotation like `Template = true`, but it remains to figure out.  It would have been great if we could just have relied on the class itself being declared `partial` instead of adding `Template = true`, but I suppose one doesn't want to do it in a case like this as it unnecessarily restricts the ways in which the class can be instantiated in simulation models…

Author: We already have a good definition of simulation model:
A class (of specialized class model, class or block) intended to be simulated on its own is called a
simulation model.
That imposes various semantic restrictions and they are listed.

Reviewer: The problem with that definition is that _intention_ is something subjective in the eyes of the modeler, and not something suitable for formal reasoning and implementation in tools.

Even though class validation is not something the specification deals with directly, I expect to find this kind of functionality in all Modelica tools: You simply as the tool if a given class fulfills requirements that can be checked on the class itself (without it being instantiated somewhere inside a simulation model).  When it comes to models and blocks, it would be great to have a definition of _simulation model_ that would unambiguously allow the tool to determine whether to check the full set of requirements applicable to a simulation model, or to just check the smaller set of requirements applicable to a non-simulation model.

To be of practical use, the definition needs to be simpler (easier to comprehend, quicker to check, etc) than the implicit definition that a model (block) is a simulation model iff and only if it fulfills everything needed to be simulated.

Basically I would expect that a tool only allows simulation models to be simulated.  However, for quick and dirty work, I would be OK if the tool allows me to request a model without `StopTime` to be simulated, but if I do so I should get informed that `StopTime` is required and be presented with some method of providing a value on the fly.  When requesting validation of the same model, I'd like to be informed that it is not a simulation model, along with any other information coming out of the non-simulation model validation.

A useful definition should also come with some way of turning a simulation model into a non-simulation model with minimal other side effects, so that a modeler that doesn't want the model to be validated against the full set of requirements can simply opt out of being possible to simulate.  For example, depending on the situation, either removing `StopTime` or marking the model `partial` could fulfill this need.

Author: I added the non-partial restriction, and inheritance of experiment is in #2535

> If \lstinline!StopTime! is set the model should be a simulation model.

Reviewer: This logic is wrong. Better:
```suggestion
Providing a value for \lstinline!StopTime! is a necessary condition for being a simulation model, but the converse is not true as a partial model can have a \lstinline!StopTime! without being a simulation model, see \cref{FIXME}.
```

Reviewer: This is also related to the question about why the use of _set_ was preferred over _modified_:
> In order to handle that in the future I ensure that the statement for StopTime requires that it is set; not modified.

Anyway, as suggested above, I think that _provide_ is an even better term to use in the context of annotations, as the use of _modified_ seems reading too much into the fact that annotations share grammar with the "real" modifications.

Reviewer 3: I disagree that providing a value for StopTime is a necessary condition. We have 2 different use cases. One is a model that a user creates and wants to simulate. Another one is creating a library and indicating which models are examples that can be simulated as is. In the first use case, it has never been required to specify any experiment annotation at all, as far as I know. Usually, a tool would feel in any defaults. They may be different between the tools. But I do not know of a tool that would reject a model without StopTime. The second use case is basically how MSL treats examples: we consider it an example if there is an experiment annotation and StopTime is specified. So the requirement for the StopTime to be specified is necessary only if a library developer wants to indicate that a model or a block is a simulation model.

In a way, you can view it as any model that is simulated has an experiment annotations with all those fields and maybe some other tool-specific ones. Whatever user does not specify will be filled in by tool defaults. It's only to indicate which models in a library should be considered simulation models (for example, to indicate examples) that you need to specify experiment with StopTime. Without StopTime they would not be considered examples by default. That's my understanding of how experiment works.

Reviewer: > But I do not know of a tool that would reject a model without StopTime.

I prefer to think of it as tools amending these models on the fly when the use requests a simulation. In System Modeler, the a dialog is presented where the user can modify or just confirm some tool specific defaults. For a smoother experience, there needs to be a `StopTime` in the model. From the specification's point of view, I don't think we need to consider these _simulation models_.

> The second use case is basically how MSL treats examples: we consider it an example if there is an experiment annotation and StopTime is specified. So the requirement for the StopTime to be specified is necessary only if a library developer wants to indicate that a model or a block is a simulation model.

Yes, and indicating that something is a simulation model comes with semantical rules, of particular importance when performing model validation (that is, not actually translating a model to be simulated). For example, when performing validation of a simulation model one should not give any diagnostics regarding the use of `Modelica.Utilities.Streams.print`.

Author: > > But I do not know of a tool that would reject a model without StopTime.
> 
> I prefer to think of it as tools amending these models on the fly when the use requests a simulation.

That's a non-working suggestion if the library is read-only.

\begin{annotationdefinition}[experiment]

> % henrikt-ma 2021-04: Seems strange to allow 'experiment' completely without list of options -- what would it mean?
> 

Reviewer: Since the PR states that the purpose is to no longer allow the argument-less `experiment` annotation, this comment should be removed as part of the PR:
```suggestion
```

Also, I'm afraid a paragraph break here could confuse the layout engine of pdfLaTeX or LaTeXML.

\begin{synopsis}[grammar]\begin{lstlisting}

> annotation "experiment" "(" experimentModfiers ")"

Reviewer: I agree with @eshmoylova: relying solely on pseudo-code record construction seems like a better way to require the argument list.

\end{lstlisting}\end{synopsis}
\begin{semantics}
The modifiers are for the the following record.
\begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica]
record Experiment
  Real StartTime(unit = "s") = 0;
  Real StopTime(unit = "s");
  Real Interval(unit = "s");
  Real Tolerance;
end Experiment;
\end{lstlisting}
The \lstinline!experiment! annotation defines the default start time (\lstinline!StartTime!) in {[}s{]}, the default stop time (\lstinline!StopTime!) in {[}s{]}, the suitable time resolution for the result grid (\lstinline!Interval!) in {[}s{]}, and the default relative integration tolerance (\lstinline!Tolerance!) for simulation experiments to be carried out with the model or block at hand.
If \lstinline!StartTime! is not specified it is assumed to be \lstinline!0.0!.

> Tools should use appropriate defaults for \lstinline!Interval! and \lstinline!Tolerance!.

Reviewer: This addition is outside the scope of the PR; it's the topic of #2251.
```suggestion
```
